Why IJPAUC? By WJC

Suppose that Steven Spielberg’s mid-career magnum opus, his “last Summer vacation,” Jurassic Park (1993), reflects his own guilt over his personal involvement in the reckless endangerment of two children killed on a “Steven Spielberg Production” in 1982.

Even if true, why would the discovery of this involvement matter, all these years later, in today’s far more troubled times? 

In my seminal media essay, IJPAUC? (2025), I argue that Jurassic Park (1993) is an unconscious confession. By that I mean that: when Spielberg’s emphasis in interviews on the role of psychoanalysis and autobiography to his working process is taken seriously, the evidence is overwhelming that the franchise-founding ‘90s blockbuster bears the heavy imprints of the infamous 1982 Warner Bros’ Twilight Zone: The Movie film set helicopter accident that took the lives of two illegally-hired child “extras,” Myca Le (7), and Renee Chen (6).

I am not the first to make the connection between Jurassic Park and the Twilight Zone accident; I am, however, the first to ask whether it constitutes a “confession.” In other words, I consider the cultural status of Jurassic Park in light of the unanswered—and indeed, unasked—question of whether or how Spielberg was involved in the high-level planning of the fatal sequence and/or sanctioning (explicit or tacit) of the illegal hiring.

In the three books written about the case (Special Effects, 1987; Outrageous Conduct, 1987; Fly by Night, 2022), each by reporters who sat in on the trial, the question of Spielberg’s involvement in the planning of the fatal sequence remains one of plausible and serious interest. In short, the lion’s share of the blame for the tragedy fell upon co-producer/writer/director John Landis: he along with two production subordinates was charged with two counts of Manslaughter for the extreme callousness represented by the illegal hiring itself; and he and two technicians were charged with separate counts for negligence in the performance of their professional duties on-set. But Landis and his two subordinates maintained that co-producer Spielberg’s camp—the more experienced group of filmmakers, who had been tasked by the studio with keeping an eye on Landis—were well-aware of the illegal hiring and had given it their blessing. On painstaking analysis, the facts of the matter largely support Landis’ claim.
 
The purpose of this supplementary essay is to explain the significance, or upshot, of my conclusions as to Spielberg’s involvement based on the available evidence. I’ll begin by recapping the accident, and the argument for Spielberg’s involvement in its particulars, before turning to what I see as the moral and poetic fallout of that involvement, given Spielberg’s titanic status as a popular American artist.

1. The Twilight Zone Accident (July 23rd, 1982)

At 2:20am, the two children had been placed in the middle of a six-camera, major Hollywood practical effects sequence (later confirmed to be a “stunt” by the NTSB) in which a marauding U.S. army helicopter, with rockets blazing, pursues the protagonist (played by Vic Morrow, 53—also killed) across a river, as he tries to deliver two war orphans to the safety of the opposite shore. But the fourth and fifth explosions fired blew through the roof of a fishing hut and destroyed the tail rotor off the helicopter, which had been called into a hover a mere 25-feet above, causing it to spiral downwards, onto the spot where Morrow had fallen onto his knees just seconds earlier, Myca under one arm, Renee under the other.

Thanks to the diligent work of singular investigators in the NTSB and the LA D.A.’s office, charges of Involuntary Manslaughter were brought against five members of the film production, headlined by John Landis, the movie’s co-producer, and the writer/director of the segment involving the children.

Landis, along with two subordinates (his Associate Producer and Production Manager), admitted to soliciting the children without permits (a misdemeanour with a maximum $5,500 fine) so as to allow them to work the children at night for artistic effect, i.e., realism. They denied that they saw any special danger in this despite the practical effects and pyrotechnics called for by the shot, because safety would be in the hands of trained professionals; the state challenged this assertion. They received two counts each, one for Myca, and one for Renee. Landis, who was widely witnessed to have called the helicopter into position, along with two technicians (the SFX Coordinator and the helicopter pilot) received three counts each for on-set negligence in the performance of their professional duties. 

After a long and contentious string of legal proceedings including a full criminal trial (1986-1987), the five defendants were finally acquitted in 1987. A $200-million dollar lawsuit filed by the families in the days after the accident was settled for approx. $2-million dollars per family during closing arguments.

￼

What does any of this have to do with Spielberg, who was only 37-years-old at the time, and preoccupied with the release and reception at the time of E.T.: The Extra-Terrestrial (July 1982)?

2. Amblin’ Entertainment, Inc.

Twilight Zone: The Movie was an anthology film co-produced by Landis and Spielberg. It featured four different segments by four different directors, of which Landis’ (an original, eventually titled “Time Out”) was the first to go to production.

Spielberg was among 14 defendants named in the civil case. But the suit had been filed in the early days after the accident and cast a wide swath. Not only Spielberg, but Joe Dante and George Miller—the directors of the other two segments—were named, who plainly had nothing to do with the hiring or accident. In the wake of the accident, Spielberg distanced himself from Landis (previously a friend or friendly rival), and by all popular tellings (e.g. New York Times, 2023) acquitted himself of whatever trivial association existed between himself and Landis’s alleged criminally-negligent actions admirably.

The question of core relevance is this: did Spielberg in any way know in advance that John Landis intended to hire two children without permits in order to be able to film on location, at night; whether or not in proximity to large industrial machines and pyrotechnics? And would this not explain Marshall’s tolerance of Landis’s flagrant employment of minors in proximity to evident danger?

Marshall and Spielberg only worked together for the first time on Raiders of the Lost Ark. At the time, Spielberg was still reeling from his first big box office flop, the SNL-inspired wartime farce, 1941 (1979). 

Executive Producer and Indiana Jones IP-holder George Lucas enlisted Spielberg to direct the project, which they would use as an opportunity to get his production practices in order; Spielberg had never previously brought in a film on time or budget. Spielberg remembered Marshall from years ago, where he’d impressed Spielberg with his work ethic. The third member of the future Amblin team was Kathleen Kennedy, who’d been a mere Production Assistant on 1941, but impressed Spielberg with her quick thinking and story suggestions. Marshall was Raiders’ Executive Producer; Kennedy was credited as “Associate to Mr. Spielberg.”

Together they successfully implemented a new production regiment: staying organized, and keeping to a strict schedule. Spielberg, already an avid storyboarder, became even more prolific, as a means of enabling more efficient production processes. Spielberg produced thousands of “thumbnail sketches,” which would then be condensed by illustrators into storyboard codices, a practice which intensified with Temple of Doom (1984) and continued through Jurassic Park and beyond.

By the summer of 1980, it was clear that Raiders was an operational success. The three decided to reboot Spielberg’s personal loan-out corporation from the ‘70s—Amblin Productions, Inc.—as a children’s and family-oriented film and TV brand, in the same general mystic suburban aesthetic Spielberg established with E.T.. Marshall and Kennedy began dating around this time, and would go on to be married later in the decade. (Spielberg was on-and-off with future first wife, Amy Irving, at the time, in a long distance relationship with live-in girlfriend, Sony record executive, Kathleen Carey).

The next two years saw the momentum continue. Kennedy went on to produce E.T. (released July 3rd, 1982), while Marshall went on to produce Poltergeist (released July 10th, 1982). At the time, Amblin’ was still in a nascent state: the movies they produced between 1980-1984 had irregular production credits, and during this time their offices were still located on the Warner Bros. lot, before moving to their famous location on the Universal Studios lot in 1984. By July 10th, 1982, the reception of Poltergeist and E.T. meant three box office hits within the span a single year.

This was the social and production context in which Twilight Zone: The Movie emerged. Spielberg had discovered the Twilight Zone movie stalled on Warner Bros’ production slate early in 1982. While the TV rights to the classic IP had been spoken for, Spielberg hadn’t realized the movie rights were independently available. He quickly thought of Landis, whom Spielberg had first met during the making of Jaws (1975), but whom he only became friendly with after Landis’ Animal House (1977)—Landis’ breakthrough success, which had become the highest grossing comedy of all time.

At the time, Spielberg, Marshall, and Kennedy, had been recruiting filmmakers to help establish an Amblin’ canon: young talents like Joe Dante (The Haunting) and Lawrence Kasdan (Continental Divide); in addition to Robert Gale and Bob Zemeckis (I Want To Hold Your Hand; Used Cars), whom Spielberg had been fostering for years. The Twilight Zone movie was then being talked about as a recurring showcase (e.g. as told by creator Rob Serling’s widow). Spielberg and Landis would co-produce. It would be a “Steven Spielberg Presents” (a credit unclaimed in the finished film). Marshall would be the Executive Producer. 

In the midst of the staggering reception to Spielberg’s long-awaited emotional and cinematic breakthrough, E.T., Spielberg was hard at work on his own Twilight Zone segment, which began as a wide-sweeping all-the-kids-in-the-neighbourhood scary Halloween story, with state of the art prosthetics by Rick Baker (of future ‘Thriller’ fame).

The deal memo between Warner Bros’ and the filmmakers (Landis’ group and Spielberg’s group) stipulated some measure of studio oversight: there were to be two gatekeepers of spending, Warner Bros’ themselves, and Disc Management Systems, Inc., a payroll company owned by Marshall, also located on the Warner Bros’ lot. Given Spielberg’s trio’s recent organizational standard bearing, it stands to reason that Warner Bros’ largely made this stipulation on Landis, whose reputation as a reckless renegade well-preceded him. Tales of destruction and debauchery on The Blues Brothers (1980) are legendary; the film had been jokingly termed “1942” by the film establishment, in reference to Spielberg’s earlier production mess. Marshall, as Executive Producer, was expected to monitor Landis’s group to make sure they got the job done on time and budget, just as he (Marshall) had on Raiders, and Poltergeist. 

Landis, during all of this, was grieving the tragic loss to heroin overdose of his muse, actor John Belushi (March 3rd, 1982).

Landis submitted his first draft on April 15, 1982. In the professed vein of Twilight Zone’s thinly-veiled social commentary, Landis’s script was—beneath the surface—a bitter indictment of America’s role in the Vietnam war. A bigot (played by Morrow) finds himself travelled back into three different eras (1941, 1954, and 1967), placed into the perspectives of those whom he so readily disparaged (blending a few classic Twilight Zone tropes) until finally being hauled off in the 1941 timeline, to a Nazi concentration camp. 

Story-wise, however, for Landis’s immediate Warner Bros’ liaison, Executive, Lucy Fisher, who gave feedback indicating the protagonist to be too unlikeable and the story overall to be bitter and ineffective from an audience’s standpoint.

Landis produced a second draft on May 24, 1982. The second draft barely changed. Landis received more feedback from Fisher at her offices that the story was too cynical, but the matter was finally settled on Saturday, July 11th, in the wave of E.T.s rapturous premiere and reception, that Landis met again with Fisher and Head of Production, Terry Semel, and together or by himself, Landis out of that meeting devised a new ending, in which the anti-hero would rescue two children from an American assault helicopter in a bombed-out Vietnamese village as a way of redeeming himself in his own and the audience’s eyes.

A third draft followed days later, followed by a fourth and final draft on July 26th, 1982, featuring a tweaked ending, and the addition of a single prop: “A broken and naked Barbie doll.” Story-wise, presumably, this is meant to tokenize the emotional gesture taking place at that particular beat—when the orphan is offering the shellshocked veteran her only comfort in a profound act of pity, the gesture which motivates his moment of reversal and enacted redemption, by returning the children to the safety of the opposite shore. The prop is visibly being clutched by 6-year-old Renee Chen during the final shot.

Was this note relevant to the overall story? And who provided it?

According to interviews with Joe Dante (the director of the next segment to go to production), Twilight Zone: The Movie in its original design emerges as a far more continuous, and self-referential—with recurring charters and motifs—than it ended up being in its eventual theatrical release in 1983, within days of Landis and four others being indicted for Involuntary Manslaughter.

Spielberg was contemporaneously involved in a public relations mix-up with Poltergeist director Tobe Hooper. On June 3rd, he’d placed ads in three trade papers, by request of the Director’s Guild of America, apologizing to Hooper for the press’s mistaken impression that he (Spielberg) had directed Poltergeist, and not the other way around. Spielberg had acquired a reputation as a hovering, back-seat director; a seemliness echoed by Julia Phillips, the co-producer of Close Encounters of the Third Kind (1977), in her notorious Hollywood tell-all, You’ll Never Eat Lunch in This Town Again (1991).

As elated and busy as Spielberg was at the time with the opening of E.T., he was characteristically obsessing over the project at hand: Twilight Zone: The Movie. Although nominally this meant his own original segment, for which he was hard at work, in his role as co-producer, Spielberg had every right to read Landis’s drafts and give feedback. Warner Bros’ would likely want and expect Spielberg to give his feedback on Landis’s segment as part of the multi-picture deal they’d just negotiated with Amblin.

It’s possible that in the name of tact Spielberg may have done so through an intermediary, such as Lucy Fisher, as argued by journalist Steve Chain in Fly By Night (2022)?

One Warner Bros’ Executive caught up in the chain of the hiring, Ed Morey, even gave the following grand jury testimony in 1983:

DA (GK): Who represented the John Landis production staff at those meetings?
EM: The executive producer, Frank Marshall; the associate producer, George Folsey Jr.; the production manager, Dan Allingham; I think Bonne Radford was there. Landis wasn’t at those meets. Never met him.
DA: Was it your understanding that Frank Marshall was simply lending his name to this production, but in essence the individuals who were running the show so to speak were John Landis and George Folsey?
EM: Yes, I think Frank Marshall was really representing Steven Spielberg.

In any case, the obvious problem presented by the new segment introduced in the third draft (June 13th, 1982) was: how was Landis’s group going to film with real children at night given well-known labour laws regulating their working hours? To say nothing of their proximity to the major practical effects spectacle Landis had been boasting about around the office for the big finale for which everyone assumed he intended to use dolls; except for Landis and his two subordinates, who knew better what Landis seemed to feel he needed for his desired cinematic effect: real children held under the real actors arms from six angles as a helicopter strafed and blasted at them from the sky above. (It would turn out to be just 25-feet above.)

The production had already settled on a location at Indian Dunes film park, about an hour north of Hollywood, where they’d budgeted to build an entire Vietnamese village set for an additional $200,000 of production expenses.

A young casting agent testified that she alerted Marshall over a month in advance (specifically, June 18th—the week following the 3rd draft) that Landis and his colleagues had been openly making arrangements to hire children “off the streets,” which she found alarming. Being only 24-years-old, she told a supervisor she trusted: Marshall, for whom she’d just worked on Poltergeist. He told her “he’d take care of it.”

It was only a few weeks later, after production had started, and Twilight Zone Productions, Inc. (the shell company representing both Landis and Spielberg) officially received approval from Warner Bros’ for the newly conceived Village-helicopter sequence.

* Landis testified that on July 9th, Marshall gave him and his co-defendants (at their offices on the Universal Studios lot) explicit permission to pursue the illegal hiring.

* Marshall’s signature is on the cheque used to disburse cash to pay the families.

* Marshall’s accountant (Bonne Radford), who was in the loop about the illegal hiring, supplied an envelope full of cash, from the Amblin’ offices, to a production assistant, the day of the accident.

* Marshall was on-set both nights the children were there, including the first night when they were kept up until 5:00am, and during the first shot in which the children were used on the second night, in which they were placed into close proximity to live explosives, underneath a low-flying helicopter, dropped into water, etc.

* Before and during the final shot, Marshall was standing beside the Location Manager (Richard Vane), the highest-ranking member of the production to admit to participating in an on-set conspiracy to conceal the children from Fire Safety Officers.

In the aftermath of the accident, Marshall—as Executive Producer—played a key role in resolving the chaos and wrapping the set, before showing up to Landis’s office the next morning to round up several boxes worth of production documents. But between the years of 1982-1987, while scores of other production members and witnesses co-operated with investigators, Marshall evaded domestic and international subpoenas for his testimony.

Marshall at least, has only spoken once on record, for the L.A. Times, in an interview intended to promote Arachnophobia (1990), when he denied any wrongdoing, and pinned his failure to cooperate with investigators on having nothing to say and being out of the country: which the D.A.’s office flatly contradicted in the same article: ”while Marshall himself was not indicted in the case, deputy district attorney Gilbert Garcetti told reporters after the trial that his office made “every effort possible to subpoena Frank Marshall but he was able to get out of our hands.”

As for Spielberg, he was never reported to be on Landis’s set, except for once by a truck driver who later said he must have mistaken Marshall for Spielberg. Spielberg provided a signed affidavit saying he’d never been on Landis’s set. Beyond that, Spielberg provided two very similar, highly-curated statements to the same L.A. Times reporter just after the Oscars in 1983 and 1984. When asked about the accident by a reporter in 1985 during a CNN interview, Spielberg reportedly put up his hands and asked that the cameras be turned off. 

Spielberg’s long-pending deposition for the civil trial was reportedly two days after the lawsuit was settled (May 7th, 1987).

Spielberg never distanced himself from Marshall, nor the two other Amblin contractors seriously implicated in the hiring and subsequent conspiracy to conceal the children from authorities (Vane and Radford), who all received promotions in the years to come. Most recently, Marshall was Executive Producer on Jurassic Park: Rebirth (2025).

But would Frank Marshall facilitate or turn a blind eye to an illegal hiring for Landis, if not with approval from Spielberg?

And why would Spielberg have any interest whatsoever in whether real children were used for Landis’s segment?

￼

Well, why did Landis for that matter? Artistic discretion.

Spielberg at that time was in a state of self-described filmmaking-mania. Speaking sometime in 1982:

It happened last year when I was in production on two movies at the same time, Poltergeist and E.T., and I was finishing up post production on Raiders of the Lost Ark, and I was planning a musical with Quincy Jones, and I was thinking about an adult love story called Always, and all of a sudden I realized I was a non-identity. I was existing only on celluloid and I was losing my own identification with Steven Spielberg, and I was forming sprocket holes down both sides my face, and frame lines across my body, and I was starting to move at about 8 frames a second, which is too fast to be moving in movie jargon. (20/20 Australia)

In his capacity as co-producer, Spielberg was plausibly and characteristically occupied with the film as a whole (although this particular dynamic was unprecedented). The questions are simple: did Spielberg introduce the necessity of using children?; and more importantly, was he aware of Landis’s intention to use real children for any part of the action sequence? If the latter question seems like a stretch, it’s because it helps to motivate Marshall’s bizarre tolerance of the illicit presence of children on Landis’s set particularly during the 9:30pm shot on July 22nd, 1982.

The charge of Involuntary Manslaughter can be especially confusing to a layperson. In other crimes (such as burglary), the defendant typically denies being the one to have performed the act itself. 

In the case of Involuntary Manslaughter, by comparison, the state concedes that the defendant did not intend the fatal act, but that they still performed their duty of care to those who were killed to such a degree of negligence that it warrants legal address. In other words, that the defendant claims he had no intention whatsoever of causing harm is of little or no bearing on their culpability or innocence, contrite as they may be; the prosecutor must compare the defendant’s behaviours relating to the accident to that of an imagined “reasonable person” acting in the same scenario for all intents and purposes. It therefore targets the defendant’s character at the time of putting those within their care in harm’s way (asking whether that harm was reasonably foreseeable or not); and is remarkable for treating that callousness of character (and not the intention per se) as a serious violation of the social contract in itself. The California statute is sparse but the case law concerning what “without due caution and circumspection” means in this case traces back to a judgement in 1955: negligence which is “aggravated, culpable, gross, or reckless… such a departure from what would be the conduct of an ordinarily prudent person… as to be incompatible with a proper regard for human life.”

But how exactly did they get added to the script?

I mean: who all was apprised of that change, and what did they contribute to its execution?

This point matters because Landis and two subordinates were charged with Involuntary Manslaughter for the illegal hiring itself—regardless of who was Directing or how he was Directing it.

Actually, the point is even stronger than that. Landis’s representatives could at least credibly claim their clients perceptions of danger were warped. Spielberg, Marshall, and Kennedy—far more familiar with child labour laws, given their recent experience—would be less able to make this claim.

Speaking in 1995, Jurassic Park screenwriter David Koepp said: 

The kids were kind of a challenge, because we didn’t want it to seem like they were there just to have kids in the movie. Steven, in particular, is vulnerable to criticism like that, because he likes to work with kids. He works with kids awfully well, so it’s not entirely fair, but the perception is there nonetheless. So our challenge was to find out why the kids were essential to the movies. (The Making of Jurassic Park)

Every other segment in the film ended up involving children, suggesting a possible narrative or thematic through-line established at the production level. After all, Spielberg and Marshall were working door-to-door in the same Warner Bros’ “Amblin Productions” bungalow where the film as a whole was a going concern.

Given that Marshall is embedded in the illegal hiring, and he faced no professional consequences for this association, is it possible that Spielberg knew about the illegal hiring?

These and other questions were raised by Landis’ attorney in 1985:

Simple interviews with Spielberg, Marshall, and Kennedy would reveal that these highly placed and acknowledged experts knew that a scene was being shot in their own movie in which actors were being used in a scene with a helicopter and special effects. These participants knew the elements of the scene and would have stopped the production had they ever thought that special effects could not be safely used with actors and helicopters. For Kesselman to have pursued the conspiracy to employ minors without a permit would have resulted in the destruction of his manslaughter case against the five targeted defendants.

Frank Marshall was on the set on the night of the accident as well as on the previous night. Marshall saw the children present and saw them in the 9:30 shot in which they were held by Vic Morrow in a scene with a helicopter and special effects. Marshall was present the whole evening and observed the 11:30 sequence involving Morrow, the 2:00 rehearsal as well as the scene in which the accident occurred. Marshall was the producer of the "Twilight Zone" and participated at meetings in which the hiring of the children was discussed and agreed upon. Since the statute of limitations has now expired, he has no fifth amendment right and if asked will hopefully tell the truth. But what must be emphasized again is the fact that his participation in the hiring of the children without permits was viewed as a "technical" violation that in no way meant that anyone was in danger.

Marshall and Kennedy could verify that Kennedy called the Department of Labor to determine whether permits could be obtained for minors after hours. It was only after her call received a negative response, that the decision was made to employ the children without permits. Again, Ms. Kennedy had no belief that there was any danger even though she was intimately acquainted with the nature of the shot and the use of the children. In fact, she was on the set the prior night when the scenes filmed on the fatal night were scheduled to be shot.

With respect to Mr. Spielberg, Marshall and Kennedy will be able to state whether he knew that children were to be employed without permits. It could be reasonably inferred that given the close relationship between Spielberg, Marshall and Kennedy and Spielberg’s close supervision of his own movies, that it would be almost inconceivable that Marshall and Kennedy would not tell Spielberg that children were to be employed without permits on Spielberg’s own movie. (Harland Braun to L.A. D.A.’s Office, December 1985)

Although they produced a fresh international subpoena for Marshall, Interpol only finally intercepted him and Kennedy in Spain March of 1987, after their testimony was of no use.

Lest the reader consider the very suspicion of negligence on the part of Amblin to be prejudiced, consider the company’s documented history of actor endangerment 1975-1982:

* On Jaws, in 1975, several actors were put at undue risk due to the carelessness of the production. I mean for example, Susan Backlinie, the stunt actor who played Jaws’ first victim sustained: “lacerations and bruises for years to come, don’t ask,” according to Julia Phillips. Richard Dreyfuss describes her as having been “waterboarded” by Spielberg during sound recording. A 12-year-old volunteer playing another key victim was held underwater by divers in order to get the desired shot; and a “little person” stunt actor was almost eaten alive on camera by a real Great White Shark because the production’s miniature oxygen tank turned out to be defective.

* In a 1981 Dick Cavett interview, Spielberg demonstrates an in-depth understanding of stunts and stunt danger. He also describes pranking actor Karen Allen during the filming of Raiders of the Lost Ark by dropping a snake on her on film, in a production context in which literally 7,000 live snakes were used at the request of the director; including several lethal cobras. Why was this thought to be necessary?

* In Vanity Fair’s Poltergeist, JoBeth Williams describes being brutalized in the name of a practical effects shot: “And when I got off after a few takes, I said, ‘Steven, I’m bleeding. My elbows and knees are bleeding!’ And he said, ‘That’s all right. We can just wipe the blood off. It’ll never show.’ And I said, ‘Oh, I feel much better now. Thank you.’ I had to laugh.”

* In The Making of E.T., Kennedy describes compelling a highly-resistant 4-year-old girl into the foam latex E.T. costume for the sake of getting a video for Spielberg.

Although Landis told the NTSB in the days after the accident that several “thumbnail sketches” existed of the Vietnam sequence. In the end, none were turned over, nor were any other production design materials save a single “spotting plan” which—in a truly enigmatic coincidence—already depicted a downed helicopter.

The sum of the two veins of evidence carefully outlined by the journalists who covered the trial is that, while it’s possible that Spielberg was completely occurred with his own segment and/or the release of E.T., it’s also possible that he contributed to the new story solutions presented in the third and/or fourth draft, and/or was otherwise invested in Landis’s being able to film with real children at night, whether simply for facial close-ups, or for modest practical effects, or for Landis’s envisioned finale. At the very least, the question deserves to be asked, given Spielberg’s production role and Marshall’s incriminating but weakly-motivated negligence.

I join this with a third vein of evidence: the psychoanalytic yield of Jurassic Park (1993). As mentioned in the opening statement of this essay, Spielberg over the years has frequently made the comparison between his filmmaking and psychotherapy. When this premise is taken remotely seriously, it unlocks Freudian analysis as a mode of interpretation critical to understanding Spielberg’s oeuvre.

In Jurassic Park, two children, a boy and a girl, are repeatedly put in danger of violent death from above at an approximate height of 25-feet (the exact height of the animatronic T-Rex). Although Spielberg did not write Jurassic Park the novel or any of its drafts, he is documented as being very closely involved with its narrative development; just as he is with most of his films.

[Photos & Captions, e.g.: “In early drafts, Hammond complains that he’s being sued by the family of a worker injured by a dinosaur for “$2” or “$20” Million dollars, echoing the May 1987 settlement with the Chen and Le families.” …

￼
Caption: At the grand jury, the Set Designer testified that as far as he knew the crashed helicopter in the “spotting plan” was the result of an independent brainstorm by the Production Illustrator. But if the image the police had in evidence as the spotting plan is correct, it looks nothing like a production sketch and everything like an icon labelled “HELICOPTER (CRASH)”. As for what this means, the reader is free to speculate.]

The intense impression of the accident is unmistakable. As to what to make of the psychoanalytic sample in the end, Freud seems split.

The patient remains under the influence of the analytic situation even though he is not directing his mental activities on to a particular subject. We shall be justified in assuming that nothing will occur to him that has not some reference to that situation. His resistance against reproducing the repressed material will now be expressed in two ways. Firstly it will be shown by critical objections; and it was to deal with these that the fundamental rule of psycho-analysis was invented. But if the patient observes that rule and so overcomes his reticences, the resistance will find another means of expression. It will so arrange it that the repressed material itself will never occur to the patient but only something which approximates to it in an allusive way; and the greater the resistance, the more remote will be the substitutive association which the patient has to report from the actual idea that the analyst is in search of. The analyst, who listens composedly but without any constrained effort to the stream of associations and who, from his experience, has a general notion of what to expect, can make use of the material brought to light by the patient according to two possibilities. If the resistance is slight he will be able from the patient’s allusions to infer the unconscious material itself; or if the resistance is stronger he will be able to recognize its character from the associations, as they seem to become more remote from the subject, and will explain it to the patient. Uncovering the resistance, however, is the first step towards overcoming it. 

The psychoanalytic yield seems only to produce several spiral galaxies of unresolved theoretical quanta, some of which I detail in the notes.

According to McBride, in the years between 1987-1992, Spielberg went through a phase of healing and personal growth reflected in the films: .

What if Jurassic Park (1993) wasn’t Spielberg’s “last summer vacation” before adulthood, as it’s often represented, but the most pivotal moment of his therapeutic phase?

Say what you will about John Landis but at least he faced the music.

3. Why IJPAUC?

A. Why the question?

In Aristotle’s Rhetoric, he argues that those who write about the science of persuasion either misunderstand or misrepresent the role of the speaker’s perceived personal character.

…for it is not in the way some of the speech-art makers assume in their “arts,” that the decency of the speaker contributes nothing to his persuasiveness, but character, one might say, has in it just about the most decisive means of persuasion. (I.2, trans. Sachs).

The “problem” of this project can finally be described in its full dimensions:

The question of assigning responsibility for The Twilight Zone tragedy is eclipsed by the screaming, bullying, maniac calling the shots: director John Landis, already a major figure in American film history.

Yet someone else, orders of magnitude more significant to the cinema arts is also implicated; or, at least, has been shielded from the question by those who are (like Executive Producer Frank Marshall).

Why have we so far been unable to ask or even “see” this question? And what does it mean or matter?

i. Motivating Marshall’s Actions

Landis and his two subordinates charged with the two “office” counts of Involuntary Manslaughter maintained that Marshall gave them the explicit go-ahead to solicit two children without permits.

They say this happened on two dates: July 6th and 9th, 1982. On the first date, they say, they discussed with Marshall the problem presented by the children called for in the script set to be shot on location at night at Indian Dunes. Marshall told them his colleague (by whom they say he meant Kennedy) would call the Labor Board to see about the possibility of receiving a waiver to shoot past the customary 6:30pm deadline for young children. At the end of the week, Marshall returned to tell them that it would not be possible to get waivers, at which point they decided they would solicit two children to work without permits for the sake of getting the scene, including the big six-camera helicopter-and-pyrotechnics finale.

They alleged that Marshall too did not believe the scene as written to be meaningfully dangerous. For Marshall, as for them, they reported, the illegal hiring hinged simply on the inability to film with children at night. They never believed the proximity to the practical effects called for by the script to be dangerous insofar as they were to be managed by technical experts.

But while it’s possible that Landis and his reckless regulars deferred to Marshall on the matter of children and the law, given his authority, responsibility, and recent experience, it’s not plausible that Marshall believed the scene as written to be anywhere near appropriate for children insofar as it involved practical effects. Marshall and Kennedy would have known these laws well from their work on E.T. and Poltergeist.

As well, the Commissioner for the Labor Board testified that the time that Marshall reported to the defendants that waivers could be gotten until (8:30pm) was inconsistent with the  time waivers are granted until as a matter of course (10:00pm); indicating the possibility that Marshall or Kennedy never even called the Labor Board, as the defendants alleged Marshall had represented on July 9th.

Granting that the testimony of Landis et al must be regarded with maximum suspicion, it remains an important starting place in the absence of any testimony by the Amblin trio on the matter.

Again, this is of special pertinence to Marshall who, as a matter of fact, was the film’s Executive Producer, was charged with overseeing the production’s finances, was warned over a month in advance of Landis’ intentions, was on-set both nights the children were there, including during an earlier 9:30pm shot involving the children in what should’ve been obvious risk and illegality to the experienced producer.

￼

Is it possible that Marshall presumed—however foolishly—that Landis would use dummies of children for the big upcoming finale?

In order to believe this, one must believe that the alibi established by Location Manager Richard Vane at the grand jury in 1983 holds good. Vane was standing beside Marshall at the time of the accident and maintains that Marshall turned to him during the final shot and asked, “those are dummies they’re using, aren’t they?” Again, Vane admitted to participating in a conspiracy to conceal the children on-set, up to and including that final shot; he claims he believes the children were going to be used for a short, later pick-up shot. However, the Fire Safety Officer in question says he was asked by Vane three times in the lead-up to the final shot where he planned to be standing in his final position.

Even granting this concessions, however, because of Marshall’s untroubled presence during the 9:30pm shot involving the children—if nothing else—the question remains.

ii. What was the extent of Spielberg’s input and involvement in Landis’s segment?

Why would Marshall allow Landis—whom he did not know personally—to use two small children at 9:30pm in close proximity to helicopter, explosives, etc.?

And how come Spielberg never distanced himself from Marshall, Vane, or Radford, despite their involvement in facilitating an under the table hiring operation involving two 6-and-7-year-old children who went on to be killed?

Unless he too was aware?

As suggested by Landis’s lawyer in 1985:

Simple interviews with Spielberg, Marshall, and Kennedy would reveal that these highly placed and acknowledged experts knew that a scene was being shot in their own movie in which actors were being used in a scene with a helicopter and special effects. These participants knew the elements of the scene and would have stopped the production had they ever thought that special effects could not be safely used with actors and helicopters.

The lawyer additionally observed:

In addition, the letter that was obtained from Spielberg after the accident is interesting in that he only states that he was not on the set the night of the accident but nowhere addresses himself to the issue of whether he knew the children were employed without permits. Since that employment was an issue at the time the letter was written, one would assume that he could have denied his guilt simply by adding an additional line. 

The range of possibilities allowed by evidence uncovered during the trial seems to be as follows.

It’s possible that Spielberg knew nothing about the illegal hiring whatsoever. However, given his proximity to those involved, and his investment in Twilight Zone’s overall story and arc, it’s possible that Spielberg contributed either the story or the note adding the Barbie doll prop to the story. Given Marshall’s dreamlike complicity in the hiring, without professional consequences, one has to consider whether Spielberg was interested in seeing the film realized a certain way.

The question has never been asked.

None of the myriad graphical production materials made by the film were ever turned over to the authorities, except for one.

iii. Significant Latent References to the Accident in Jurassic Park (1993):

In interviews, Spielberg frequently compares movies to dreams. Although Spielberg often plays off his investment in anything psychological, he frequently employs the terms and themes of Sigmund Freud and Carl Jung. In interviews, he often speaks of a mortifying first encounter with psychoanalysis in his father’s therapist’s office. After 6 months of the teenage Spielberg free-associating, the therapist said he would not write him a letter exempting him from the war effort.

Most recently, in Spielberg (2017), the director stated plainly, “I’ve never needed therapy, because movies are my therapy.”

Speaking of his of semi-fictional, The Fabelmans (2022), Spielberg said, “making this thing […] was like a $40-million therapy session.”

According to Freud: 

If the resistance is slight [the therapist] will be able from the patient’s allusions to infer the unconscious material itself; or if the resistance is stronger he will be able to recognize its character from the associations, as they seem to become more remote from the subject, and will explain it to the patient. 

When the psychoanalytic features of Spielberg’s work are acknowledged, the likeness between Jurassic Park (1993) and the Twilight Zone tragedy became impossible to ignore.

￼
Production illustration (circa 1991) for Jurassic Park (1993), based on a thumbnail sketch by Steven Spielberg. 


￼
Last known photo of Myca and Renee. July 22nd, 1983. Barbie doll prop not pictured.

Or the detail in any early draft (all of which were heavily influenced by Spielberg’s notes in the form of stream-of-consciousness narration) about Hammond being sued for $2-million dollars by the bereft family of a worker killed in raptor attack fraudulently misrepresented by the company and him personally as an industrial accident. This, once again, echoes the approximate settlement paid out to the Chen and Le families as a result of their $200-million dollar civil suit.

Or the fact that the T-Rex is 25-feet high, the same height as the helicopter. And all the actions sequences of it bearing down on two children, a boy and girl, in vehicles, from above. All of this is just the tip of the iceberg.

Underneath an ironic meta-referential sheen characteristic of the ‘90s in general—the story told the own optimistic retelling of its own coming into existence. The characters and the audiences were experiencing the new frontier of technology, just as they, the filmmakers had, during the story’s production.

But when that sheen is recognized and abstracted, what remains is a wish-fulfilled allusion to the Twilight Zone accident hiding in plain sight.

How this supplements the existing body of evidence regarding Spielberg’s possible involvement is unclear; as Freud argues, it depends on the savvy interpretation of a human analyst, not a pre-determined algorithm.

The psychoanalytic yield of Jurassic Park (1993) is indeterminate; spawning, instead of definite answers, nebulae of unresolved associative quanta.

What does it all mean?

B. The Basis of Hope in Trust

“After undergoing many changes, Tragedy stopped when it attained its own nature.” — Aristotle, Poetics 4

In Aristotle’s On Poetics (335 BCE), the philosopher sets his sights on a phenomenon he recognizes as a fairly late development in human culture: the emergence of comedy and tragedy as distinct art forms, which had only recently come to flourish with Ancient Athens “golden generation” (Euripides, Sophocles, Aristophanes, etc).

Among imitations in general, Aristotle was fascinated by tragedy in particular for its amazing “special quality” of inducing emotional catharsis in its spectators. This, to him, made it a very special case, insofar as it offered an articulated view of its mechanisms, put in intelligible terms of human action (i.e., the real-world effects of the choices we make in the living of our lives). A “story,” (mŷthos), Aristotle said, was that which unifies its events and dynamics (as the soul does with the body).

Aristotle favoured (for analysis at least) the tragic form over what we today usually think of as a “story” simply, which Aristotle would have characterized as a “drama” or “melodrama.”

To Aristotle, “drama” was a derivative form; because Aristotle theorized that tragedy got its power from a precise psychological device, one most visible in tragedy.

((The power was a way of exploiting imitation’s ability to make even scary things painless and enjoyable to watch; enjoyable, because as one watched, it was if one was learning. This is because, as Aristotle observed, a story was a sort of algorithm, a logical sequence playing itself out before our eyes.

The power exploited a certain queasy feeling felt in the human heart when it witnessed a moment of poetic justice; what was that? The precise extent to which they “appear to have come to be as if for a purpose.”

Aristotle theorized the ‘special effect’ to be a peculiar, momentary confusion of “fear and pity” in the spectator’s imaginary conception of themselves and their emotional reality.

Fear and pity for Aristotle are two geometrically-related emotions; fear relates to the prospect of pain and suffering; pity is that feeling as it relates to others who don’t deserve it.

(Much of what Aristotle describes in the Poetics is geometrical, e.g.: For Margites (Homer’s apparently lost ‘Epic Comedy’) stands in an analogy: just as the Iliad and the Odyssey are related to tragedies so is this related to comedies. Once tragedy and comedy came to light side by side…’)

By the time the protagonist’s slow-building dread is shown to have been well-founded, the spectator has come to relate to their situation; so that when the other shoe drops, the reaction is triggered. And we find ourselves pitying those who we see, in some respects, very much do deserve it.

And that reaction reminds of not only of similar experiences in our own lives, depending on the specifics of the story; amazement at the range of human experience; an empathy for them, and ourselves, and a general feeling of “philanthropia” or love of all mankind in general (cf. also EN10 to the same effect.) All of this produced “catharsis.”—

[a sort of cleansing or release of those same feelings of “fear and pity.”

By that (we learn at the end of a related text, the Nicomachean Ethics, Book X,) he means the general anxiety human-beings get when they worry their past mistakes has made them prone to regret. Sometimes, Aristotle theorized, they benefited from having this sort of periodic emotional release.

Aristotle saw real therapeutic and political potential in catharsis. This public deployment and enjoyment of the arts was not a devolution—as Plato often characterized it—but the high mark of civilization.

As for Comedy, Aristotle seemed to think in the end it was identical in form with the Drama.

Note clearly that Aristotle is not saying tragedy is the best form. Just that it exemplifies the nucleus of storytelling power in general.]))

All of this functions independent of the character of the poet.

What often goes unobserved, however, is that poetic objects are also often rhetorical objects, i.e., matters of public interest and influence.

“Rhetoric” according to Aristotle, was made up of strategically-compressed syllogisms. Unlike particular screenplays as such, which could be taken artistically, independently of their author’s presumed character, Aristotle pointed out, that when it came to rhetorical, public-facing objects, the speaker’s character did matter.

…for we are more persuaded, and more quickly, by decent people, about all matters without exception, and completely so in matters in which there’s is nothing precise but there is divided opinions. (1.3)

If a poetic object was also a rhetorical object, then its reputation mattered. Moral currency, somehow, was real. 

[[Was it just an incidental association?

Or did the necessity of this association affect the art as well?]]

At what point does a poem, a tragedy, or drama, or comedy, or speech, or “national imaginary” cease to be convincing?

As the spectator became unable to believe in the miracle posited by the poem, implicitly or otherwise, the psychic landscape itself seemed to become dilapidated.

This was the mindset in which the Athenians encountered the Melians, as dramatized by the historian, Thucydides, who was brought back to front page news in the US and Worldwide in January 2026.

On January 6th, White House correspondent Steven Miller seemed to cite Thucydides, speaking as the Athenians:

We live in a world, in the real world, Jake, that is governed by strength, that is governed by force, that is governed by power. These are the iron laws of the world since the beginning of time.

Prime Minister Carney seemed to reply, at Davos a few weeks later:

It seems that every day we’re reminded that we live in an era of great power rivalry, that the rules-based order is fading, that the strong can do what they can, and the weak must suffer what they must. And this aphorism of Thucydides is presented as inevitable, as the natural logic of international relations reasserting itself. (January 22nd, 2026, presumably in direct reply?)

Neither party seemed to grasp the full scope of Thucydides’s very simple warning.

The Athenian ambassadors approach the Melian people and tell them they’re going to become a colony of the empire now and they’re going to need to start paying tribute to help the war effort against the Spartans.

The Melians say: hey, we’ve always been independent.

Athenians say the bit about power, “iron laws,” blah blah. ‘Shut up and do what we say because we say so and that’s what justice is now,’ more or less. They didn’t even bother to dress it up; just the old spiel.

The two parties quibbled about the relative chances of the Melians’ survival, should they resist—the Athenians said 0%, the Melians said something more than zero, in case conditions with regards to Sparta were favourable.

They dragged out a siege with the Athenians over a gruelling 6-month summer campaign, when the resources were needed elsewhere.

Just one in a series of unnecessary, arrogant miscalculations that spelled the upset of the Athenian empire.

As long there remained a shred of hope.

This attitude can’t be beaten out of human-beings. Not in the final analysis.

[[In Iraqi-Israeli New Historian Avi Shlaim’s account of the early theories underlying the Zionist project he describes a similar outlook as that advanced by foundational thinking Lev Jabotinsky, in his essay “the Iron Wall” (1923):

I do not mean to assert that no agreement whatever is possible with the Arabs and the Land of Israel. But a voluntary agreement is just not possible. As long as the Arabs preserve a gleam of hope that they will succeed in getting rid of us, nothing in the world can cause them to relinquish this hope, precisely because they are not a rabble but a living people. And a living people will be ready to yield on such fateful issues only when they have given up all hope of getting rid of the alien settlers. Only then will extremist groups with their slogans “No, never” lose their influence, and only then will their influence be transferred to more moderate groups. And only then will the moderates offer suggestions for compromise. Then only will they begin bargaining with us on practical matters, such as guarantees against pushing them out, and equality of civil and national rights.

And so on and so forth, with narrative-adjustment also an end justified by the means.

But the speculative outlooked turned out to be narrow in the sense that it overlooked the ability to really and truly negotiate a peace, with serious gestures of good faith on both sides.

But, as Shlaim demonstrates in his careful reconstruction of actual American and Jordanian archival materials, the record tends to show that time and time again the Arabs were far more ready to renegotiate than they’re generally given credit for in the prevailing Western narrative. Making the “Iron Wall” strategy, which Shlaim argues was sublimated into the Israeli “activist” strand of political thought. 

It turned out in other words to be rather speculative.]]

The practical problem, again, was that, in some way, the narrative depended for its function on the credibility of the speaker.

This again turned on the concept of hope. Aristotle brings it up early in the Poetics again, speaking geometrically:

But the imitation is not only of a complete action but of fearful
and pitiable things, and these come to be both especially or
more wherever on account of one another they come to be
contrary to expectation? For if this is the case, it will be
more wondrous than if they come to be spontaneously or
by chance, since even among chance things those seem
most wondrous which appear to have come to be as if for a
purpose. For example; the statue of Mitys at Argos killed
the one who was the cause of the death of Mitys; it fell on
him while he contemplated it. For it is likely that as things
of this sort do not come to be at random, so stories of this
sort are of necessity more beautiful. (1452a)

Specifically the line at the end: “For it is likely that as things of this sort do not come to be at random, so stories of this
sort are of necessity more beautiful.”

Without hope of a miracle the distinctive tragic effect never fully emerges.

In other words, once the hope is gone, the imitation ceases to be credible. So much so in fact that (more than previously supposed) the reality or truth conveyed by the poem itself becomes, as it were, dilapidated. Once its modelled moral framework is reckoned against the quantitative material reality. 

This is dramatized in Shakespeare’s MacBeth.

After stabbing the king, Duncan, MacBeth found himself at a loss for words. Overhearing a drugged guard mumble, in his dreams, “Amen,” MacBeth tries to repeat it.

MACBETH
But why couldn’t I say “Amen?” I needed G_d’s blessing most profoundly, but the word “Amen” got stuck in my throat.

(The Socratic critique of the sophist’s politics—at least from the Straussian analysis—is that made by Xenophon, that the sophist-trained generals thought, falsely, that all men could be controlled with speech.)

In Aristotle’s time, there was renewed interest in the melodrama as a form thanks to experimental plays such as Euripides’ Iphigenia at Taurus, which turned tragic expectations up on their head, by having the heroes make it through at the last minute. Instead of producing the tragic effect directly; it did so by way of a sort of afterimage. This satisfied the audience’s wish for the events of the play to end as they would according to prayer.

Spiritual reality is no longer credible in light of the physical.

May-we-be-so-lucky, the End of History.
